Public speaking is the process or act of performing a speech to a live audience. Public speaking is commonly understood as formal, face-to-face speaking of a single person to a group of listeners.Traditionally, public speaking was considered to be a part of the art of persuasion. The act can accomplish particular purposes including to inform, to persuade, and to entertain. Additionally, differing methods, structures, and rules can be utilized according to the speaking situation.

Significance of Public Speaking
        
Over the years, public speaking has played a major role in education, government, and business. Words have the power to inform, persuade, educate, and even entertain. And the spoken word can be even more powerful than the written word in the hands of the right speaker.
 
Benefits to public speaking include:        
 
Improves confidence 
Better research skills
Stronger deductive skills
Ability to advocate for causes
And more
Public speaking is especially important for businesses since they've got a need to get their message before potential customers and market their business. Sales people and executives alike are often expected to have good public speaking skills.

Profile of a good speaker
 
A public speaker who exudes confidence is viewed as being more confident, accurate, knowledgeable, intelligent and likable than a speaker who is less confident of what they are saying. It's natural to be nervous, but to excel in public speaking, you have to overcome your nervous jitters.
Five Characteristics of a Public Speaker are:
Confidence
Passion
Introspection and Self Awareness
Being Yourself
Engagement with your Audience

steps to prepare a formal speech
1. Develop the Purpose (Inform, Persuade, Motivate, Celebrate)
2. Analyze the Audience - ongoing 
3. Develop the Topic (or Thesis for persuasive speeches)
4. Investigate the Subject
5. Structure the Message
6. Convert the Message for Oral Interpretation 

Methods of Public Speaking

Impromptu Speaking
Impromptu speaking is the presentation of a short message without advance preparation. Impromptu speeches often occur when someone is asked to “say a few words” or give a toast on a special occasion. You have probably done impromptu speaking many times in informal, conversational settings. 

Extemporaneous speaking
Extemporaneous speaking is the presentation of a carefully planned and rehearsed speech, spoken in a conversational manner using brief notes. By using notes rather than a full manuscript, the extemporaneous speaker can establish and maintain eye contact with the audience and assess how well they are understanding the speech as it progresses. The opportunity to assess is also an opportunity to restate more clearly any idea or concept that the audience seems to have trouble grasping.

Manuscript Style
Manuscript speaking is the word-for-word iteration of a written message. In a manuscript speech, the speaker maintains his or her attention on the printed page except when using visual aids.

Memorized speaking
Memorized speaking is the rote recitation of a written message that the speaker has committed to memory. Actors, of course, recite from memory whenever they perform from a script in a stage play, television program, or movie scene. When it comes to speeches, memorization can be useful when the message needs to be exact and the speaker doesn’t want to be confined by notes.

Effective Public Speaking Techniques

Care About Your Topic
Remember Your Speaking Goal
Support Your Main Points
Tell a Story